Mutex viability check for gate 2 ruling [T1], run by the FIX AND GOAL sitting (orchestrator,
opus @ max), 2026-08-12, against the executor's implementation.

WHY THIS EXISTS. I ruled that the sensor serialize its two writes under a named mutex. The
executor used the `Global\` namespace. Creating an object there normally needs
SeCreateGlobalPrivilege, which a standard user token may not carry — and if the constructor threw,
the sensor block's outer catch would swallow it and NEITHER file would be written. The sensor
would stop, quietly. So the ruling needed this check before it could stand.

Two questions, both answered by measurement rather than by reading documentation:

  1. Can a NON-ELEVATED session create and take a Global mutex on this machine?
  2. Under contention, does the second waiter time out cleanly rather than hang or throw?

RESULT

  Global mutex create+acquire: OK  held=True
  elevated: False
  second waiter got the lock: False  (expected False)

Both answered. Creation and acquisition succeed without elevation, so the constructor does not
throw and the sensor is not silently disabled. The second waiter returns False at the 250 ms
timeout — it does not block the status line and it does not raise — so the skip-both-writes path
the ruling depends on is genuinely reachable.

CORROBORATION. The watchdog drill and the full drill suite both exercise the sensor for real and
both are green (74 of 74 in this sitting's own run), which is only possible if the mutex is being
taken and the two files are being written.

RESIDUAL, recorded rather than hidden. This proves the behaviour for this user on this machine. A
different account whose token lacks the privilege would see the constructor throw, the sensor block
skip both writes, and the reading age out into UNKNOWN after 15 minutes — loud and non-halting,
which is the correct degradation, but it would be a dead sensor rather than a working one. This is
a single-developer machine and the sensor is per-machine, so the case is not reachable today.
